# Current #

# BackLog #

- Professionalism

- What to call ourselves? (Coder, Developer, Engineer?) and what do these imply? 

- different word than 'code'.

- delete code if it is no longer working (esp. tests)

- Start with retros.

- what makes good software (user perspective vs. developer perspective)

- paraphrase from Sussman86: garbage collecting needs to be small not
because of speed but because it is the only program you MUST be able
to keep in your head entirely at one time. If it goes wrong it trashes
memory and no audit trail, almost impossible to debug.

- at the very end of SICP video 10b - sussman's issues with top-down
desgign.  Is TDD top-down or bottom-up?

- REPL vs. TDD (and how to use them together)?

- "If one diligently applies information hiding or separation of
  concerns to a large system, one is certain to end up with a great
  many modules."
  A Rational Design Process: How and Why to Fake It
  PARNAS, CLEMENTS

- "The decomposition into and design of submodules is continued until
  each work assignment is small enough that we could afford to discard
  it and begin again if the programmer assigned to do it left the
  project."
  A Rational Design Process: How and Why to Fake It
  PARNAS, CLEMENTS

- From Paige: I'm new to TDD and writing tests in general, but I've
been trying to learn more about how to do them and have discovered
that I really enjoy unit testing. However, I've found that object
oriented programming seems to make testing harder, specifically in
trying to account for all of the possible configurations of state and
to write useful tests to match. Do you see a big difference in how
functional and object oriented programs are tested?

- From Paige: I watched a talk online called "Simple Made Easy" by the
creator of the Clojure language and thought it was inspiring, and so I
began to look into resources for learning Clojure. But I was
intimidated by the fact that many of the texts and tutorials I found
made frequent references to Java (and to the JVM), which I haven't
learned yet. Do you think that I ought to try to learn Java before I
dive into Clojure?

- From Paige: On a related note to the preceding question, I'd be
really interested in reading your take on a comparison between Clojure
(or another LISP language) and a language that I'm familiar with
(Python or JavaScript), especially regarding whether their are certain
types of projects that you think are better suited to one or the
other.

- From Paige: Until I began interviewing for jobs, pretty much all of
the programming experience I had was done in isolation. I'd paired
with and talked to other people about programming some, but hadn't
been thought much about or been exposed to real,
i.e. professional/business-driven, software development contexts
before. I've recently learned some about the different ways that
development teams are sometimes structured, though I'm still not quite
clear on how everyone's jobs fit together. Do you have any thoughts
about what is the ideal role / manner of communication for a "product
manager" to play in a team of engineers? How do you find front-end /
backend/ designers/ UXers should all communicate? Do you think there's
an ideal size for a software team working on one project?

- From Paige: As a new developer, I'm really thrilled by the prospect
of pairing with experienced developers. However, I'm also nervous
about slowing someone else down/ making the programming process less
enjoyable for the other person. Do you have any advice about how
someone like me-- passionate about programming but still
inexperienced-- can approach a pairing session / interact with senior
developers on a team in ways that will not be bothersome and maybe
even beneficial for the senior developers as well?
