---
layout: post
title: "SCNA 2013 - Effortful vs. Automatic Brain"
date: 2013-11-09 19:07
comments: true
categories: scna scna2013
---

## Experts Don't Know what they Know ##

This year's SCNA Conference seemed to have several talks which touched upon
the idea of experts having implicit knowledge. That is to say: they know
things but can't necessarily explain what they know, or why. Ken Auer and Dave
Thomas touched upon it; during the panel on Software Quality it was also
brought up (e.g.  Corey Haines amazing reference to Chicken Sexing[sexing]).
But I felt that Brian's talk took the idea and then added to it.

## Bright vs. Dull Cows ##

Brian started talking about this implicit knowledge idea - giving his wife as
an example. His wife (a veterinary professor) teaches her students to
determine if a cow is 'bright' or 'dull' (a subjective diagnosis). Her
students specify, day-after-day, if cows are dull or bright. She then corrects
them. They usually ask how she could tell and she tells them something
(drooping ears, nose-cleaning, etc.). But really these specific clues are not
*really the way to tell*. Those who can diagnose a cow as bright or dull
cannot explain why.

This anecdote seems to show that the implicit knowledge of the expert is
something that can be trained. When discussing this idea Corey Haines
mentioned a conference session which Michael Feathers gave where he had the
attendees give quick good/bad judgement calls on snippets of code. Then
tallied those up and found that some snippets had a large amount of agreement
as to their good-/bad-ness. They then discussed and tried to determine why.
In light of Marick's anecdote however it seems that they might never find out
*why*, but maybe they could train themselves by looking at a lot of code and
being corrected when they get the judgement wrong.

(Marick hopes to use this sort of idea to be able to train himself to have a
nearly physical reaction to bad code. While that sounds cool, I worry about a
'Ludovico Technique' for code.

## Effortful vs. Automatic ##

Brian then talked about two types of thinking: Effortful and Automatic.
Effortful is the sort when you need to do a non-trivial arithmetic, or a tough
parking job. Automatic is when you do simple math like 2+2 or easy driving
where you are sort of on autopilot. When you use the Effortful way, it
actually takes *effort*. It is slower seems to be only possible to do it
serially. Automatic thinking is faster, takes little effort, and seems to be
parallelizable.

If you don't have something in Automatic then your brain shifts to Effortful;
sort of a cache miss.  If you do something enough, or become good enough at
it, you can put stuff into your Automatic cache.

## Switching to Automatic ##

So how can this be done? While Marick offers the usual 'practice, practice,
practice', he adds to it an interesting idea about 'Set and Setting'. 'Set and
Setting' is an idea from Timothy Leary about why drugs such as LSD seem to
have very different effects in different people. The mindset (Set) of the
person (which includes things like rituals which build up that mindset) and
the Setting (environment) have a strong influence on the experiences of that
person. 

By being aware of which mindsets (and how to enter them) and what settings are
most beneficial for programming (and even different types of programming) he
feels he can move some programming tasks into his Automatic thinking area.

## Conclusion ##

It seems to me that the idea of 'Automatic' and 'Effortful' adds to the idea
of the expert's implicit knowledge. Perhaps the expert's knowledge is just an
expression of Automatic thinking? 

I'm interested in trying out the practice of being more aware of my own 'Set
and Setting' with respect to code.

[sexing]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicken_sexing
