---
layout: post
title: "Learning from my Apprentice"
date: 2016-05-24 19:43:37 -0400
comments: true
categories: 
---

My company, Cyrus Innovation, has started an Apprenticeship program.
This program involves bringing on people who are brand new to
programming and pair them with a Senior developer to train them in
good practices. About a month ago I 'acquired' an Apprentice:
[Paige](https://paigelearnscode.wordpress.com/). 

I've never done this sort of thing before and I quickly came to
realize that the relationship wasn't just Master & Apprentice but
really Apprentice-Master & Apprentice. I am not only learning as I go
what it means to have an Apprentice but also learning *from* my
Apprentice.

Even more than normally during pair-programming I feel I need to
explain myself. Not only explaining how to do something in the
programming language, but how to do it with our tools, and how we'll
do something in the context of our team. Add to that explaining the
*why* of it all as well. This exercise helps me remember and
reconsider why *I* do things the way I do, why they are important.

This also brings to light good practices which I have chosen *not* to
do in this current situation. Perhaps there are reasons, perhaps those
reasons are good, sometimes they are not. By having to explain the
trade-offs and reconsider the bad reasons I am learning why I make
these decisions.

Also by embodying some good behaviors she is teaching me some tricks
about how to learn. She is a careful attentive listener, always asking
questions to get clarification. She also tests her knowledge by
sharing what she does know (even if not sure) which either adds to the
collective knowledge or is corrected.

So I hope she is learning something by pair-programming with me; but I
know I'm learning something from her.
